The Dreaded Comparison

Human and Animal Theory

Author: Marjorie Spiegal

transcribed in text for archival purposes


racism: 1. a belief that human races have distinctive characteristics that determine their respective cultures, usually involving the idea that one's own race is superior and has the right to rule others. 2. a policy of enforcing such asserted right. 3. a system of government and society based upon it.

speciesmism: 1. a belief that different species of animals are signifcatnly different than one another in their capacities to feel pleasure and pain and live an autonomous existence, usually involving the idea that one's own species has the right to rule and use others. 2. a policy of enforcing such asserted right. 3. a system of government and society based upon in.

[Image 1:
Top caption: A slave auction in Virginia 1861
Description: 3 black slaves, one holding an infant, are being auctioned off to a large group of white people in masculine dress who have various levels of disinterest in the proceedings. Two more slaves are awaiting auction near the stand.

Bottom caption: The cattle market in Chicago, 1868
Description: Cows in pens meet the horizon as an auctioner shows off a cow to a small group of people in masculine clothing.]

SYMPATHY

I know what the caged bird feels, alas!
When the sun is bright on the upland slopes;   
When the wind stirs soft through the springing grass,   
And the river flows like a stream of glass;
When the first bird sings and the first bud opes,   
And the faint perfume from its chalice steals—
I know what the caged bird feels!

I know why the caged bird beats his wing
Till its blood is red on the cruel bars;   
For he must fly back to his perch and cling   
When he fain would be on the bough a-swing;
And a pain still throbs in the old, old scars   
And they pulse again with a keener sting—
I know why he beats his wing!

I know why the caged bird sings, ah me,
When his wing is bruised and his bosom sore,—
When he beats his bars and he would be free;
It is not a carol of joy or glee,
But a prayer that he sends from his heart’s deep core,   
But a plea, that upward to Heaven he flings—
I know why the caged bird sings!

- Paul Laurence Dunbar, (1872-1906)
son of two runaway slaves

Chapter Title: An Historical Understanding

Comparing speciedism with racism? At first glance, many people might feel that it is insulting to compare the suffering of non-human animals to that of humans. In fact, in our society, comparison to an animal has come to be a slur.

Why is it an insult for anyone to be compared to an animal? In many culutres, such a comparison was an honor. In Native American cultures, for example, individuals adopted the names of admired animals, and had spirit guides - in animal form - who served both as teachers and escorts into the realm of the spirit world. Names such as sitting Bull, Running Deer, and Hawkeye are familiar to us, expressive of the admiration Native Americans had for the animals with whom they shared both the earth and the afterlife. Native Americans, Ancient Egyptians, some African tribes, and many other ancient and aboriginal cultures the world over have worshipped various animals as gods or messengers to god. So how is that we find ourselves in a time when comparison to a non-human animal has ceased to be an honor and is instead hurled as an insult?

By the time the New World was "discovered" and colonization began, Europeans had "subdued" most of the land which they had for centuries inhabitated [1] Europen's wilderness were long gone, replaced with a very "managed" countryside comprised of "English gardens" rolling hills where mighty forests had long ago stood, and relatively few stands of woods, often maintained as hunting grounds.

Understandably, it came as quite a shock to the British colonists' psyches when they encountered the unbridled and deeply forested North American wilderness. The white Puritan colonists measured "progress" and "civilization" in terms of (among other things) how far a people could distanc themselves from Nature. "Countless diaries, addresses and memorials of the frontier period" writes historian Roderick Nash, attest to this in their representations of "the wilderness as an 'enemy' which had to 'conquered', 'subdued', and 'vanquished' by a 'pioneer army'."[2] To the average colonist, explains Nash,

"wilderness...aquired significance as a dark and sinister symbol. [The pioneers] shared the long Western tradition of imagining wild country as a moral vacuum, a cursed and chaotic wasteland. As a consequence, fortiersmen acutely sensed that they battled wild country not only for personal survival but in the name of nation, race and God. Civilizing the New World meant enlightening darkness, ordering chaos, and changing evil into good [3]"

Holding these beliefs, white Christians were convinced that it was virtually a moral obligation to conquer any people who were still living in harmony with the devil-ridden, moral wasteland of nature - as "savages," in their opinion. Paying no regard to the level of cultural sophistication or even to the general happiness of the people living within their native societies, the conquerors merely saw "heathens" while proceeding to destroy entire cultures, along with the ancient ecosystems which had long supported them.

In 1688, the idea of the "noble savage" was introduced by English playwright and novelist Aphra Behn in Oroonko. The noble savage hated his fellow slaves because they were:

"by Nature Slaves, poor wretched Rogues, fit to be used as Christian Tools; Dogs, trecherous and cowardly, fit for such Masters; and they wanted only but to be whipped into the knowledge of the Christian Gods, to be the vilest of all creeping things[4]"

The slave who had thus capitulated to his master personified the beliefs about nature and the denizens of the natural world held by the Christian conquerors, who maintained that they were serving God by whipping nature, animals, and black people into submission. And how convenient that they could obtain a slave work force while perfoming their sanctimonious acts. After all, there could exist no moral obligation towards any of those in league with the forces of chaos, darkness, or the devil.

In the above passage by Aphra Behn we also see sign of the trend toward using comparison to an animal as an insult: "dogs, treacherous and cowardly..." Centuries later, an excerpt from an essay by James Baldwin exemplifies the integral part which this comparison has come to play in blacks' consciousness as they continue to struggle for equality:

The American triumph - for which the American tragedy has always been implicit - was to make Black people despise themselves. When i was little i despised myself; I did not know any better. And this meant, albeit unconsciously, or against my will, or in great pain, that i also despised my father. And my mother. And my brothers. And my sisters. Black people were killing each other every night out on Lenox Avenue, when i was growing up: and no one explained to them, or to me, that it was intended that they should; that they were penned where they were like animals, in order that they should consider themselves no better than animals. Everything supported this sense of reality, nothing denied it; and so one was ready, when it came time to go to work, to be treated as a slave. [5]

All of this has had a negative effect on the lives of human and non-human animals alike. As long as humans feel they are forced to defend their own rights and worth by placing someone beneath them, oppression will not end. This approach, at the very best, results only in an individual or group of people climbing up the ladder by pushing others down. There is evidence of this approach in the world today: racially motivated gang-wars among impoverished youth; in the United States, white working class racist violence directed at working class blacks, who suffer from the residual effects of slavery in the form of prejudice and job discrimination; in Britain, black youths attack Indian owned businesses. It is unfortunatly common to those who feel trapped within circumstances they feel powerless to change often quarrel among themselves, feeling even more powerless to impact those who actually make the laws, profit from the system, and exert great influence over economic opportunities.

But winding its way through the history of inequality within our culture has been another approach, which today grows ever stronger; its main tenet is that we cannot maintain that oppression is fine for some simply because they are not like us. Only through a rejection of violence and oppression for themselves will we ever find a long term "freedom and justice for all." It is not an "either-or" situation; the idea that one group will have its rights protected or respected only after another "more important" group is totally comfortable is finally being recognized as a delay tactic used by those resisting change. Women were told to keep waiting for years for their right to vote because other issues were "more important." Black people in the United States were told that their slavery was an "economic necessity" to be continued for the good of the country. Until the reforms of the early 1990's, blacks in South Africa were still being told that apartheid was necessary. Necessary for whom? Surely not the people who were living under this form of slavery.

With the exception of those who still cling - either overtly or subtly - to racist thought, most members of our society have reached the conclusion that it was and is wrong to treat blacks "like animals." But with regard to the animals themselves, most still feel that it is acceptable to treat them, to some degree or another, in exactly this same matnner; to treat them, as we say, "like animals." That is, we have decided that treatment which is wholly unacceptable when received by a human being is in fact the proper manner in which to treat a non-human animal. 

A line was arbitrarily drawn between white people and black people, a division which has since been rejected. But what of the line which has been drawn between human and non-human animals? We often behave as if there were a wide and bridgeless chasm, with humans on one side and all the rest of the animals on the other. Even our terminology reflects this attitude: we speak of "humans" in one breath, and in the next, lump all over animals into one grab-bag of a category entitled "non-human animals." On what basis was this line drawn? Surely the line, if need be drawn at all, could have been placed with equal or greater accuracy in any one of the a number of places. We are, for instance, much closer genetically and behaviorally to other primates than non-human primates are to toads. So perhaps the line could be drawn after other primates. Or, the line could just as reasonably be drawn so as to seperate all mammals from other creatures, for mammals share common attributes which other animals lack.

But one problem with this approach is that it presupposes some sort of "worst to best" ascension list, ranging from the "simplist" beings straight up to human beings - at the top, of course. This attempt to rank species reflects a chronic misinterpretation and misapplication of Darwin's evolutionairy theory, falsely concluding that humans are evolution's "finished product." On the contrary, Darwin's Origin of Species implied that humans were evolutionairy first cousins to modern-day apes and orangutans, all distinctly and simultaneously evolving from a common ancestor, just as, for example, distinct species of cats branched off from an ancient feline form. Darwin went further writing in his notebook that "animals may partake from our common origin in one ancestor... we may all be netted together."

Darwin was even more specific in his views about the commonalities between other animals and the human species. "The senses and intuitions," wrote Darwin in 1871, "the various emotions and faculties, such as love, memory, attention, curiousity, imitation, reason, etc. of which man boasts, may be found in an incipient, or sometimes even well-developed condition in," as they were often called in Darwin's day, "the lower animals."[6] He concluded that "there is no fundamental difference between man and the higher mammals in their mental faculties." [7]

Nevertheless, from the miscontrued concept that humans are evolutionairy better than animals it easily followed (to those who were predisposed to the position) that whites could be evolutionarily superior to blacks. In fact, based on popularized (mis)interpretation of evolutionairy theory came the trend of "Social Darwinism." Darwin had spoken of natural selection in relation to adaptation, but the Social Darwinists - usually the powerful or wealthy - adopted natural selection as the key to "progress." Darwin himself took great exception to this application of his theory, by which ruthless behavior towards different races, classes, or species could be rationalized and justified as being only a demonstration of evolution in action, a manifestation of "nature red in tooth and claw."

Before the concept of evolution was widely known and accepted, religious doctrine - which placed ("civilized", white, Christian) humans above all other beings - served as justification for the subjugation of both blacks (whom pro-slavery writers and orators often claimed were of a different species!) and non-human animals; this subjugation was said to be ordained by God. Later, under the banner of Social Darwinism, both the unmitigated violence toward the "lower" animals and the enslavement of black "savages" in Africa were looked at as expressions of an evolutionairy birthright.

Common only a quarter-century ago were charts depicting the evolution of primates from distant ancestors, up through various hominids, to a black person, and finally to a fully upright Aryan male. Without much of an uproar over their scientifically cloaked, subvertly racist message (nor their poor science with other modern primates), these charts were quietly retired. But they might give us some reason to pause as we consider a similair ranking system which places all humans up on the evolutionary pedestal, to the exclusion of other animals.

As we have seen, Darwin himself believed that evolutionairy history is no basis for deciding "who is better than whom." Evolution occurs as the result of genetic mutations and there is no moral basis for declaring that the mutated form is better than the unmutated ascestral form. But even comparison of a modern species to its own evolutionary predecessors makes better sense than what is usually attempted: comparison of humans to other animals from completely different biological families, in an effort to determine "which is best." Actually, in evolutionairy time, humans are relatively new additions to the landscape; our current stage of development finds us without a harmonious or stable position within an ecosystem. Nor have we yet "worked out" all the quirks in our physiology or behavior, leaving our species with significant problems which simply don't exist for the members of most other highly complex species.

But is any of this relevant in determining if humans or any other animals are "worthy" of moral consideration? What are the qualities which a being need possess before treating them "like an animal" would be unacceptable? The more we learn about the earth's environment, its ecosystems, and the creatures who live here, the more we see the absurdity in the concept of ranking species against on another. All life on earth is inextricably bound together in a web of mutual interdependence. Within that web, each species of animal has a niche for which it is more or less adapted, and attributes which others lack. It is only an anthropocentric world view which makes qualities possessed by humans to be those by which all other species are measured.

If the earth was suddenly colonized by a species more powerful and bellicose than human beings, they could just as easily use attributes special to themselves when devising their ranking system. Let us suppose that by chance the aliens closely resembled a member of the cat family. They might decide to use the ability to see in near-darkness as the determining factor for who was worthy of freedom and who would be exterminated or enslaved. Measured against the standards of the alien cats, virtually all humans would be miserably lacking and, if those cats were anything like us when it came to ethics, humans would spend their lives in bondage. Their use of night-vision as a criterion would only be as self-biased as the criteria which we have decided to use. But it is we rather than the alien cousins of cats who are presently calling the shots, and as such we have made those characteristics which are claimed to be exclusively human attributes the requirements for moral consideration.

Many philosophers have clearly comprehended our bais. In the sixteenth century, Michael Eyquem de Montaigne wrote extensively on the subject. "I see some animals," Montaigne reflected "that live so entire and perfect as life, some without sight, others without hearing: who knows whether to use also one, two, or three, or many other senses, may not be wanting."[8] Some two centuries later, Lichtenberg made it clear that he thought it foolish to unfavorably judge another creature by human standards. Equally foolish was it to believe that human attributes were any more or less remarkable than those special to another species. "The most accomplished monkey," observed Lichtenberg, "cannot draw a monkey, this too only a man can do; just as it is also only a man who regards his ability to do this as a distinct merit." [9] It is only human arrogance that is able to find beauty and perfection exclusively in those things human. "Just as foolish," continued Lichtenberg, "as it must look to a crab when it sees a man walk forward."[10]

During periodic voices of reason, action and tradition still demanded proof of our "superiority," in the form of vital differences, that would provide justification for man's dominion over the animals. What are those elusive soley-human qualities? Included among a veritable laundry list of attributes compiled in this exhaustive search for exclusivity are the ability to feel pain, to feel emotions, to reason, the possession of a soul, the ability to make free choices, and to speak a language - all claimed at one time or another to be fatures unique to human beings. [11]

In direct conflict with Darwin's views on the subject were those espoused, two centuries earlier, by Rene Descartes, a stalwart proponent of human superiority over non-human animals. Descartes believed animals lacked souls (while humans possessed them), intelligence, and even the ability to feel  - pleasure, pain, or anything. If you struck one, the animal would cry out only in the same manner as a clock would chime, as a result of the workings of similair internal mechanisms. Bolstered by such Cartesian philosophy, psysiological experiments on  animals became an even more macabre endeavor, since any cries, any displays of suffering of efforts to escape, were viewed as the sounds and movements of veritable wind-up-toys.

While very few people today would publically declare themselves in agreement with such extreme views, in our treatment of most non-human animals, we still behave like true Cartesians. And while most people, I believe, informally and in theory agree with Darwin's views which recognize that animals are thinking, feeling beings, we still search for the moral loophole - the qualities possessed by humans and lacked by non-human animals - that will enable us to find a defensible reason to justify continuing to treat animals "like animals." Yet all false claims of behavioral uniqueness and exclusivity are easily dismissed with common sense and unprejudiced observation. On the subject of reason, one modern essayist argued:

Although animals are unable to do algebra, they are able to make rational decisions regarding their own interests. Dogs, for example, would never be so irrational as to intentionally inhale smoke; they must be forced to do this by contemporary "researchers." I think it is safe to say that animals, in their own way, are at least as reasonable - that is, rational in pursuit of their own interests - as human beings. [12]

Attempts at moral disqualification on the basis of reason have not been used to exclude only non-human animals from the sphere of consideration. For centuries, black people were called "irrational," and this was used both as a reason to continue their "protective custody" (in the form of slavery), and to justify their virtually limitless abuse. Just as claim has been popularly abandoned with regard to blacks, so too is it finally being widely disproved and retired with regard to animals.

Anyone who has spent time around animals knows that they both communicate with each other and try, with varying degrees of success, to communicate with our species. Montaigne suggested that they and we fail equally at attempts to bridge the inter-species communication gap, and are equally frustrated. "This defect that hinders communication between them and us, why is not just as much ours as theirs?" he asked. "We have some mediocre understanding of their meaning; so do they of ours, in about the same degree. They flatter us, threaten us, implore us, and we them." [13]

Not a hundred years later, Descartes, in all his determined ways, drew an altogether different conclusion. "All human beings," he began, "no matter how dull or stupid, even madmen, can arrange various words together and fashion them into a discourse...Contrariwise," he continued,

"no animal however perfect or well-bred can do anything of the sort. This is not simply because they lack the right organs, because magpies and parrots can learn to utter words as well as we can...and people born deaf and mute - who are at least as handicapped as the beasts are - have the custom of inventing their own signs, with which they communicate."[14]

"It seems incredible," concluded Descartes, "that the very best and brightest of monkeys or parrots could not learn to speak as well as the stupidest child...unless their souls were of an entirely different nature from our own." [15]

With the continued exception of some species of birds, animals still lack, of course, the vocal chords needed for verbal communication on our terms. Yet some of us are communicating with animals in ways which would make even Descartes take notice. Chimpanzees, orangutans, and gorillas have all been taught to communicate with humans through American Sign Language. Washoe, the first chimp to learn ASL, taught her adopted baby to sign. Perhaps best known is the gorilla named Koko, who since 1972 has been communicating with scientist Francine Patterson. Koko has a vocabulary in ASl of over 1000 words and understands spoken English, using ASL to respond. She can also read some printed words, including her own name, and creates new compound words to express thoughts and feelings her taught vocabulary did not provide for.

It is not only primates who are capable of such "human" communication. Jeffery Moussaieff Masson cites the case of a parrot who unquestionably disproves the accepted belief that these birds can only repeat, devoid of context, remembered phrases. Left by his trainer at a veterinarian's office, the parrot pleaded, "Come here. I love you. I'm sorry. I want to go back." [16]

Yet even if some vast, undeniable distinction between humans and animals could finally be found, would that mean that we could then justify using, mistreating, even torturing, animals? Could we then say, as did eighteenth-century writer Thomas Love Peacock, that "nothing could be more obvious, that all animals were created soley and exclusively for the use of man"?[17] From any perpective other than one predisposed to slave-holding, we could not; that special, mythical quality or attribute that was the sole domain of humans would still be irrelevant. For what does someone's ability to speak French, drive a car, see in the dark, do algebraic equations, or use a tool, have to do with whether or not it is acceptable or just to enslave, torture, or in some other way inflict cruelty upon them? The only relevant requirement which should be necessary to keep us from unnecessarily inflicting pain and suffering on someone is that individual's ability to feel pain and to suffer. Similarly, the only qualification individuals should need to make it wrong for us to dominate their lives is that they possess life, that they are alive. All of these other questions of abilities and attributes can fill philosophy books, but are, for these issues, irrelevant.

This is not intended to oversimplify matters and to imply that the oppressions experienced by blacks and animals have taken identical forms. A complex web of social, political, and economic factors sustained slavery and made possible the life of a slave as it was known. This book in no way attempts to make the case that these factors are the same for animals; there are distinct social, political, and economic factors which create and support the subjugation of animals, as well as differences between the possible manners in which blacks and animals could respond to their respective enslavements. But, as divergent as the cruelties and the supporting systems of oppresion may be, there are commonalities between them. They share the same basic essence, they are built around the same basic relationship - that between oppressor and oppressed. 


[Image 2:
Left Caption: Branding a calf
Left Description: A calf is violently held down by two people, and appears to be in great distress, with their mouth open and eyes wide as they are likely in pain and scared. Two others assist the branding. Smoke from the branding is obscuring some details.

Right Caption: Branding a captured woman
Right Description: The woman at the center of the picture has been stripped bare to the chest. ]

So, even though we may think of the experiences of black people in this country as being unique - as are, really, the experiences and reactions of every individual - there are many disturbing similarities between their treatment at the hands of white people in the United States and the treatment of animals at the hands of a large sector of the American Population. Indeed, just as humans are oppressed the world over, animals receive poor treatment in nearly every human culture on earth.

Further, any oppression helps to support other forms of domination. This is why it is vital to link oppressions in our minds, to look for the common, shared aspects, and work against them as one, rather than than prioritizing victims' suffering - (what we have already identified as "either-or" pitfall). For when we prioritize we are in effect becoming one with the "master." We are deciding that one individual or group is more important than another, deciding that one individual's pain is less important than that of the next. A common result of prioritization is infighting among the oppressed or defenders of the oppressed, doing tragically little to upset the very foundations of cruelty.

Comparing the suffering of animals to that of blacks (or any other oppressed group) is offessive only to the speciesist: one who has embraced the false notions of what animals are like. Those who are offended by comparison to a fellow sufferer have unquestioningly accepted the biased worldview presented by the masters. To deny our similarities to animals is to deny and undermine our own power. It is to continue actively struggling to prove to our masters, past or present, that we are similar to those who have abused us, rather than to our fellow victims, those whom our masters have also victimized.

Let us remember that to those with a master mentality, there is often very little difference between one victim and the next. When both blacks and animals are viewed as being "oppressible," the cruelties perpetrated upon them take similar forms. Later we will explore whether these similarities are due to mere chance or to something which operates deep in the minds of the masters. In the meantime, let us note that the domination of animals, which was being honed to a clumsy science centuries before black slavery in America began, was in many cases used as a prototype for the subjugation of blacks. So observed Keith Thomas in his important study Man and the Natural World:

"Once perceived as beasts, people were liable to be treated accordingly. The ethic of human domination removed animals from the sphere of human concern. But it also legitimized the ill-treatment of humans who were in a supposedly animal condition. In the colonies, slavery, with its markets, its brandings and its constant labor, was one way of dealing with men thought to be beastly. The Portuguese, reported one English traveler, marked slaves 'as we do sheep, with a hot iron,' and at the slave market at Constantinople, Moryson saw the buyers taking their slaves indoors to inspect them naked, handling them 'as we handle beasts, to know their fatness and strength.'"[18]

The suffering animals currently endure at the hands of human beings in laboratories, on "factory farms," as pets, and in the wild, sadly parallels that endured by black people in the antebellum United States and during the lingering postbellum period. The parallels of experience are numerous. Both humans and animals share the ability to suffer from restricted freedom of movement, from the loss of social freedom, and to experience pain at the loss of a loved one. Both groups suffer or suffered from their common capacity to be terrified by being hunted, tormented, or injured. Both have been "objectified," treated as property rather than as feeling, self-directed individuals. And both blacks, under the system of slavery, and animals were driven to a state of total psychic and physical defeat, as a result of all or some of the variables mentioned above. (With animals, of course, this continues today in its most extreme form.)

From all of this we see that the liberation of animals, while a pressing and worthy goal in its own right, is not of importance _only_ to non-human animals. While people are no longer branded, inspected at auction, or displayed in zoos, subtler forms of oppression are still in operation which have their counterparts in animals' slavery. Advances toward releasing animals from our domination and control of their lives will also serve to lessen the oppression of blacks and others who suffer under the weight of someone else's power. By eliminating the oppression of animals from the fabric of our culture, we begin to undermine some of the psychological structures inherent in a society which seems to create and foster masters. With a philosophy of universal respect for other's lives, treating anyone - human or non-human - in a cruel manner begins to be unthinkable.

The views presented in this book of such eminent thinkers, writers, and activists as Frederick Douglass, Harriet Beecher Stowe, Richard Wright, Paul Lawrence Dunbar, and many others, show us that they were acutely aware of the similarities between human and animal slavery. Let us follow their example and being to reject oppression in all its forms.

"[Slaves] have been treated by the law upon the same footing as in England, for example, the ... animals are still. The day may come when the rest of animal creation may acquire those rights which could never have been withholden from them but by the hand of tyranny. [Some] have already discovered that the blackness of skin is no reason why a human being should be abandoned without redress to the caprice of a tormentor. It may come one day to be recognized, that the number of legs, the villosity of the skin, or the termination of the _of sacrum_, are reasons equally insufficient for abandoning a sensitive being to the same fate ... The question is not, Can they _reason_? nor, Can they _talk_? but, Can they _suffer_?" - Jeremy Bentham, _The Principles of Morals and Legislation_, 1789

Chapter Title: Oppression in Language and Literature

"In dem days ole Brer Dog wuz e'en 'bout like he is dese days, scratcin' fer fleas en growlin' over his vittles stidder sayin' grace, en buryin' de bones w'en he had one too many. He wuz des like he is now, 'ceppin' dat he wuz wile. He galloped wid Brer Fox, en loped wid Brer Wolf, en cantered wid Brer Loon. He went all de gaits, en he had des ez good a time ez any un um en des ez bad a time." - Joel Chandler Harris, "Why Mr. Dog is Time," from _Nights with Uncle Remus: Myths and Legends of the Old Plantation_, 1883

Lasting testimony to the severity of white oppression of blacks can be found in American Literature. Not surprisingly, this literature also preserves tangible evidence of the intermingling, in the minds of some whites, of the two groups with which we are here concerned: blacks and non-human animals.

Because society's opinion of animals was so low, racist authors and anti-abolitionists propagandized against blacks by comparing them to negative stereotypes of non-human animals. Even today, we are still familiar with some of the negatively-charged animal names black people have been called: _buck, fox, monkey, ape_, and _coon_ - imbued with none of the respect with which Native Americans gave to the use of animal names.

"The Brute Negro" is one of seven stereotypes of black people found in American literature, as identified by Sterling Brown in his essay "Negro Character as Seen by White Authors." One of the most blatant ironies of these comparisons is that this stereotyping of blacks rests upon sterotypes of animals which are false in their own right. Reality was blindly ignored by these authors as they churned out banalities of savage apes and lewd, promiscuous beasts. As could be expected, the books made no mention of the very real and widespread practices of rape and brutalization of slaves by slave-owners. Some authors, such as H.R. Helper in his book _Nojuque_ (1867), set up "black" and "beastly" as exact synonyms. In his book _The Negro A Beast_ (1900), a racist theological tract, author Chas. Carrol declared, "All Scientific Investigation of the Subject Proves the Negro to Be An Ape." (This, of course, only echoed the sentiments of the racist contingency of scientists, such as Darwin's contemporary A.R. Wallace, who concluded that "natural selection could only have endowed the savage with a brain a little superior to that of an ape."[19])

Stereotypes of the 'brute Negro' in popular literature during the antebellum period are relatively rare because, explains Brown,

"the pro-slavery authors were anxious to prove that slavery had been a benefit to the Negro by removing him from savagery to Christianity ... There were references to vicious criminal Negroes in fiction (vicious and criminal being synonymous to discontented and refractory), but these were considered as exceptional cases of half-wits astray by abolitionists.

Authors stressing the mutual affection between the races looked upon the Negro as a docile mastiff. [20]"

With the Reconstruction, however, empancipation released (into literature and other forms of propaganda) the ferocity of "'Damyanks', carpetbaggers, scalawags, and New England schoolmarms", notes Brown, "affected him with rabies." [21]

Thomas Dixon, another writer of what Brown terms "Ku Klux Klan fiction," is responsible for such works as _The Clansman_ and _The Leopard's Spots_, in which are to be found such lurid chapter titles as "The Black Peril," "The Unspoken Terror," "A Thousand Legged Beast," and "The Hunt for the Animal." Brow's study demonstrates how Dixon's popular books helped to firmly fix the stereotype of the emancipated "black beast" in the minds of the masses:

"The stock Negro in Dixon's books, unless the shuffling hat-in-hand servitor, is a gorilla-like imbecile, who "springs like a tiger" and has the "black claws of a beast." In both books there is a terrible rape, and a glorious ride of the Knights on a Holy Crusade to avenge Southern civilzation. Dixon enables his white geniuses to discover the identity of the rapist by using "a microscope of sufficient power (to) reveal on the retina of the dead eyes the image of this devil as if etched there by fire." ... The doctor sees the "bestial figure of a negro - his huge black hand plainly defined ... It was Gus." Will the wonders of science never cease? But perhaps, after all, Negroes have been convicted on even flimsier evidence." [22]

Through his analysis of contemporary popular literature, Brown observed the metamorphosis which occurred in people's minds in reaction to the transition of blacks from slaves to free individuals. When the person in question was still a slave - a "good slave" mind you - he was portrayed, in Brown's words, as a "docile mastiff." When no longer enslaved, authors turned him into a "mad dog." Writing further, this time citing the work of Thomas Nelson Page, Brown comments that when "in their place, loyall serving and worshipping ole Marse," slaves were portrayed as "admirable creatures, but in freedom they are beasts." [23]

[Image 3: Left, a black person, presumably enslaved, who is wearing a metal mask that blocks all but their eyes and nose holes. Right: A drawing of a horse, who is wearing a mask that blocks blocks all but access to their mouth, eyes, and has slots for their ears.]

We don't even need to invent a metaphor to see how these attitudes relate to non-human animals; animals are _already used as the metaphor_. Brown's "mastiffs," "mad dogs," and "gorilla-like imbeciles" reveal not only the predilications of the authors whose work he critiques, but of Brown himself. Surely the sensitivity and intelligence of the gorilla Koko - one of the few gorillas who has come to be known as an individual person - dispels the long-held myth of the stupidity and violence of these magnificent beings. Yet in seeing the comparisons of blacks to animals that were so prevelant in the period literature of this study, Brown accepted and, through his response, subsequently strenghtened the the negative views about animals held by racist authors.

So "beastly" are animals considered, that to be like one implies the worst, that you are bad. It would logically follow that a person who is unlike an animal must by definition be good. First-century Christian philospher Saint Augustine had already set the trend when he wrote "For so excellent is a man in comparison with a beast, that man's vice is beast's nature" [24] Brown's indignation at these offensive books blinded him to the fellow victims of their propaganda; in effect he responds by saying "We're nothing like those lowly beasts."

We've seen how these concepts affected humans; we need only to turn the metaphor on its head to see how animals are affected. When obedient and subservient, an animal is a loyal companion, a "good slave." When independent, an animal becomes suddenly transformed in our eyes into an uncontrollable beast. (Signfificantly, the words _black beast_ translate into Frenche as _bête_[animal] _noir_ [black], a term meaning _nemesis_.) Think of the stories we were raised with, stories of "Big Bad Wolves" who prey on the innocent, silly, _domesticated_ (and therefore good) piglets. Stories of "Lions and Tigers and Bears" who in their wild and _uncontrolled_ state, seem to live only to single-mindedly lunge at you from behind every tree.

Upon closer examination, we find the thoughts and language of oppression to be present not just in children's stories and other literature, but woven into the very fabric of our culture. For example: think of the term we use for the domestication of a wild horse: "to _break_ a horse." This has quite a literal meaning, for when we tame a horse, we actually do _break_ her. We break her spirit, bend her to our will, make her a subordinate and subservient servant. In the antebellum South, there were men called "n----- breakers," to whom "troublesome," "uppity" slaves were sent. Frederick Douglass was, in fact, sent to such a man. [transcriber's note - the racist slur is spelled out in the text, but I feel nothing is lost by refusing to type it.]

Language, along with the written word, serves to perpetuate and reinforce prejudicial attitudes prevalent in our culture. And indeed, our language is deeply imbued with the terminology of the master's perspective. Yet we must take responsibility: ultimately, we create language, it does not create us. In the face of a culture rife with violence, even a wordless conviction about another way to interact with others still speaks eloquently.